Intelligence-Driven Computer Network Defense
Informed by Analysis of Adversary Campaigns and
Intrusion Kill Chains
Eric M. Hutchins∗, Michael J. Cloppert †, Rohan M. Amin, Ph.D. ‡
Lockheed Martin Corporation
Abstract
Conventional network defense tools such as intrusion detection systems and anti-virus focus on
the vulnerability component of risk, and traditional incident response methodology presupposes a
successful intrusion. An evolution in the goals and sophistication of computer network intrusions
has rendered these approaches insuﬃcient for certain actors. A new class of threats, appropriately
dubbed the “Advanced Persistent Threat” (APT), represents well-resourced and trained adversaries
that conduct multi-year intrusion campaigns targeting highly sensitive economic, proprietary, or
national security information. These adversaries accomplish their goals using advanced tools and
techniques designed to defeat most conventional computer network defense mechanisms. Network
defense techniques which leverage knowledge about these adversaries can create an intelligence
feedback loop, enabling defenders to establish a state of information superiority which decreases the
adversary’s likelihood of success with each subsequent intrusion attempt. Using a kill chain model to
describe phases of intrusions, mapping adversary kill chain indicators to defender courses of action,
identifying patterns that link individual intrusions into broader campaigns, and understanding the
iterative nature of intelligence gathering form the basis of intelligence-driven computer network defense
(CND). Institutionalization of this approach reduces the likelihood of adversary success, informs
network defense investment and resource prioritization, and yields relevant metrics of performance
and eﬀectiveness. The evolution of advanced persistent threats necessitates an intelligence-based
model because in this model the defenders mitigate not just vulnerability, but the threat component
of risk, too.
Keywords: incident response, intrusion detection, intelligence, threat, APT, computer network defense
1 Introduction
As long as global computer networks have existed, so have malicious users intent on exploiting vulnerabil-
ities. Early evolutions of threats to computer networks involved self-propagating code. Advancements
over time in anti-virus technology signiﬁcantly reduced this automated risk. More recently, a new class
of threats, intent on the compromise of data for economic or military advancement, emerged as the
largest element of risk facing some industries. This class of threat has been given the moniker “Advanced
Persistent Threat,” or APT. To date, most organizations have relied on the technologies and processes
implemented to mitigate risks associated with automated viruses and worms which do not suﬃciently
address focused, manually operated APT intrusions. Conventional incident response methods fail to
mitigate the risk posed by APTs because they make two ﬂawed assumptions: response should happen
after the point of compromise, and the compromise was the result of a ﬁxable ﬂaw (Mitropoulos et al.,
2006; National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2008).
APTs have recently been observed and characterized by both industry and the U.S. government. In June
and July 2005, the U.K. National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre (UK-NISCC) and the U.S.
∗eric.m.hutchins@lmco.com
†michael.j.cloppert@lmco.com
‡rohan.m.amin@lmco.com
1
Computer Emergency Response Team (US-CERT) issued technical alert bulletins describing targeted,
socially-engineered emails dropping trojans to exﬁltrate sensitive information. These intrusions were
over a signiﬁcant period of time, evaded conventional ﬁrewall and anti-virus capabilities, and enabled
adversaries to harvest sensitive information (UK-NISCC, 2005; US-CERT, 2005). Epstein and Elgin
(2008) of Business Week described numerous intrusions into NASA and other government networks
where APT actors were undetected and successful in removing sensitive high-performance rocket design
information. In February 2010, iSec Partners noted that current approaches such as anti-virus and
patching are not suﬃcient, end users are directly targeted, and threat actors are after sensitive intellectual
property (Stamos, 2010).
Before the U.S. House Armed Services Committee Subcommittee on Terrorism, Unconventional Threats
and Capabilities, James Andrew Lewis of the Center for Strategic and International Studies testiﬁed
that intrusions occurred at various government agencies in 2007, including the Department of Defense,
State Department and Commerce Department, with the intention of information collection (Lewis, 2008).
With speciﬁcity about the nature of computer network operations reportedly emanating from China,
the 2008 and 2009 reports to Congress of the U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission
summarized reporting of targeted intrusions against U.S. military, government and contractor systems.
Again, adversaries were motivated by a desire to collect sensitive information (U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, 2008, 2009). Finally, a report prepared for the U.S.-China Economic
and Security Review Commission, Krekel (2009) proﬁles an advanced intrusion with extensive detail
demonstrating the patience and calculated nature of APT.
Advances in infrastructure management tools have enabled best practices of enterprise-wide patching
and hardening, reducing the most easily accessible vulnerabilities in networked services. Yet APT actors
continually demonstrate the capability to compromise systems by using advanced tools, customized
malware, and “zero-day” exploits that anti-virus and patching cannot detect or mitigate. Responses to
APT intrusions require an evolution in analysis, process, and technology; it is possible to anticipate and
mitigate future intrusions based on knowledge of the threat. This paper describes an intelligence-driven,
threat-focused approach to study intrusions from the adversaries’ perspective. Each discrete phase of the
intrusion is mapped to courses of action for detection, mitigation and response. The phrase “kill chain”
describes the structure of the intrusion, and the corresponding model guides analysis to inform actionable
security intelligence. Through this model, defenders can develop resilient mitigations against intruders
and intelligently prioritize investments in new technology or processes. Kill chain analysis illustrates that
the adversary must progress successfully through each stage of the chain before it can achieve its desired
objective; just one mitigation disrupts the chain and the adversary. Through intelligence-driven response,
the defender can achieve an advantage over the aggressor for APT caliber adversaries.
This paper is organized as follows: section two of this paper documents related work on phase based
models of defense and countermeasure strategy. Section three introduces an intelligence-driven computer
network defense model (CND) that incorporates threat-speciﬁc intrusion analysis and defensive mitigations.
Section four presents an application of this new model to a real case study, and section ﬁve summarizes
the paper and presents some thoughts on future study.
2 Related Work
While the modeling of APTs and corresponding response using kill chains is unique, other phase based
models to defensive and countermeasure strategies exist.
A United States Department of Defense Joint Staﬀ publication describes a kill chain with stages ﬁnd,
ﬁx, track, target, engage, and assess (U.S. Department of Defense, 2007). The United States Air Force
(USAF) has used this framework to identify gaps in Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR)
capability and to prioritize the development of needed systems (Tirpak, 2000). Threat chains have
also been used to model Improvised Explosive Device (IED) attacks (National Research Council, 2007).
The IED delivery chain models everything from adversary funding to attack execution. Coordinated
intelligence and defensive eﬀorts focused on each stage of the IED threat chain as the ideal way to counter
these attacks. This approach also provides a model for identiﬁcation of basic research needs by mapping
existing capability to the chain. Phase based models have also been used for antiterrorism planning. The
United States Army describes the terrorist operational planning cycle as a seven step process that serves
as a baseline to assess the intent and capability of terrorist organizations (United States Army Training
2
and Doctrine Command, 2007). Hayes (2008) applies this model to the antiterrorism planning process for
military installations and identiﬁes principles to help commanders determine the best ways to protect
themselves.
Outside of military context, phase based models have also been used in the information security ﬁeld.
Sakuraba et al. (2008) describe the Attack-Based Sequential Analysis of Countermeasures (ABSAC)
framework that aligns types of countermeasures along the time phase of an attack. The ABSAC approach
includes more reactive post-compromise countermeasures than early detection capability to uncover
persistent adversary campaigns. In an application of phase based models to insider threats, Duran
et al. (2009) describe a tiered detection and countermeasure strategy based on the progress of malicious
insiders. Willison and Siponen (2009) also address insider threat by adapting a phase based model called
Situational Crime Prevention (SCP). SCP models crime from the oﬀender’s perspective and then maps
controls to various phases of the crime. Finally, the security company Mandiant proposes an “exploitation
life cycle”. The Mandiant model, however, does not map courses of defensive action and is based on
post-compromise actions (Mandiant, 2010). Moving detections and mitigations to earlier phases of the
intrusion kill chain is essential for CND against APT actors.
3 Intelligence-driven Computer Network Defense
Intelligence-driven computer network defense is a risk management strategy that addresses the threat
component of risk, incorporating analysis of adversaries, their capabilities, objectives, doctrine and
limitations. This is necessarily a continuous process, leveraging indicators to discover new activity with
yet more indicators to leverage. It requires a new understanding of the intrusions themselves, not as
singular events, but rather as phased progressions. This paper presents a new intrusion kill chain model
to analyze intrusions and drive defensive courses of action.
The eﬀect of intelligence-driven CND is a more resilient security posture. APT actors, by their nature,
attempt intrusion after intrusion, adjusting their operations based on the success or failure of each
attempt. In a kill chain model, just one mitigation breaks the chain and thwarts the adversary, therefore
any repetition by the adversary is a liability that defenders must recognize and leverage. If defenders
implement countermeasures faster than adversaries evolve, it raises the costs an adversary must expend
to achieve their objectives. This model shows, contrary to conventional wisdom, such aggressors have no
inherent advantage over defenders.
3.1 Indicators and the Indicator Life Cycle
The fundamental element of intelligence in this model is the indicator. For the purposes of this paper, an
indicator is any piece of information that objectively describes an intrusion. Indicators can be subdivided
into three types:
• Atomic - Atomic indicators are those which cannot be broken down into smaller parts and retain
their meaning in the context of an intrusion. Typical examples here are IP addresses, email addresses,
and vulnerability identiﬁers.
• Computed - Computed indicators are those which are derived from data involved in an incident.
Common computed indicators include hash values and regular expressions.
• Behavioral - Behavioral indicators are collections of computed and atomic indicators, often subject
to qualiﬁcation by quantity and possibly combinatorial logic. An example would be a statement
such as ”the intruder would initially used a backdoor which generated network traﬃc matching
[regular expression] at the rate of [some frequency] to [some IP address], and then replace it with
one matching the MD5 hash [value] once access was established.”
Using the concepts in this paper, analysts will reveal indicators through analysis or collaboration, mature
these indicators by leveraging them in their tools, and then utilize them when matching activity is
discovered. This activity, when investigated, will often lead to additional indicators that will be subject
to the same set of actions and states. This cycle of actions, and the corresponding indicator states, form
the indicator life cycle illustrated in Figure 1. This applies to all indicators indiscriminately, regardless of
their accuracy or applicability. Tracking the derivation of a given indicator from its predecessors can be
3
time-consuming and problematic if suﬃcient tracking isn’t in place, thus it is imperative that indicators
subject to these processes are valid and applicable to the problem set in question. If attention is not paid
to this point, analysts may ﬁnd themselves applying these techniques to threat actors for which they
were not designed, or to benign activity altogether.
Revealed
MatureUtilized
Report
Analyze
Leverage
Discover
Figure 1: Indicator life cycle states and transitions
3.2 Intrusion Kill Chain
A kill chain is a systematic process to target and engage an adversary to create desired eﬀects. U.S.
military targeting doctrine deﬁnes the steps of this process as ﬁnd, ﬁx, track, target, engage, assess
(F2T2EA): ﬁnd adversary targets suitable for engagement; ﬁx their location; track and observe; target
with suitable weapon or asset to create desired eﬀects; engage adversary; assess eﬀects (U.S. Department
of Defense, 2007). This is an integrated, end-to-end process described as a “chain” because any one
deﬁciency will interrupt the entire process.
Expanding on this concept, this paper presents a new kill chain model, one speciﬁcally for intrusions.
The essence of an intrusion is that the aggressor must develop a payload to breach a trusted boundary,
establish a presence inside a trusted environment, and from that presence, take actions towards their
objectives, be they moving laterally inside the environment or violating the conﬁdentiality, integrity,
or availability of a system in the environment. The intrusion kill chain is deﬁned as reconnaissance,
weaponization, delivery, exploitation, installation, command and control (C2), and actions on objectives.
With respect to computer network attack (CNA) or computer network espionage (CNE), the deﬁnitions
for these kill chain phases are as follows:
1. Reconnaissance - Research, identiﬁcation and selection of targets, often represented as crawling
Internet websites such as conference proceedings and mailing lists for email addresses, social
relationships, or information on speciﬁc technologies.
2. W eaponization - Coupling a remote access trojan with an exploit into a deliverable payload,
typically by means of an automated tool (weaponizer). Increasingly, client application data ﬁles such
as Adobe Portable Document Format (PDF) or Microsoft Oﬃce documents serve as the weaponized
deliverable.
3. Delivery - Transmission of the weapon to the targeted environment. The three most prevalent
delivery vectors for weaponized payloads by APT actors, as observed by the Lockheed Martin
Computer Incident Response Team (LM-CIRT) for the years 2004-2010, are email attachments,
websites, and USB removable media.
4. Exploitation - After the weapon is delivered to victim host, exploitation triggers intruders’ code.
Most often, exploitation targets an application or operating system vulnerability, but it could also
more simply exploit the users themselves or leverage an operating system feature that auto-executes
code.
4
5. Installation - Installation of a remote access trojan or backdoor on the victim system allows the
adversary to maintain persistence inside the environment.
6. Command and Control (C2) - Typically, compromised hosts must beacon outbound to an
Internet controller server to establish a C2 channel. APT malware especially requires manual
interaction rather than conduct activity automatically. Once the C2 channel establishes, intruders
have “hands on the keyboard” access inside the target environment.
7. Actions on Objectives - Only now, after progressing through the ﬁrst six phases, can intruders
take actions to achieve their original objectives. Typically, this objective is data exﬁltration which
involves collecting, encrypting and extracting information from the victim environment; violations
of data integrity or availability are potential objectives as well. Alternatively, the intruders may
only desire access to the initial victim box for use as a hop point to compromise additional systems
and move laterally inside the network.
3.3 Courses of Action
The intrusion kill chain becomes a model for actionable intelligence when defenders align enterprise
defensive capabilities to the speciﬁc processes an adversary undertakes to target that enterprise. Defenders
can measure the performance as well as the eﬀectiveness of these actions, and plan investment roadmaps
to rectify any capability gaps. Fundamentally, this approach is the essence of intelligence-driven CND:
basing security decisions and measurements on a keen understanding of the adversary.
Table 1 depicts a course of action matrix using the actions of detect, deny, disrupt, degrade, deceive, and
destroy from DoD information operations (IO) doctrine (U.S. Department of Defense, 2006). This matrix
depicts in the exploitation phase, for example, that host intrusion detection systems (HIDS) can passively
detect exploits, patching denies exploitation altogether, and data execution prevention (DEP) can disrupt
the exploit once it initiates. Illustrating the spectrum of capabilities defenders can employ, the matrix
includes traditional systems like network intrusion detection systems (NIDS) and ﬁrewall access control
lists (ACL), system hardening best practices like audit logging, but also vigilant users themselves who
can detect suspicious activity.
Table 1: Courses of Action Matrix
Phase Detect Deny Disrupt Degrade Deceive Destroy
Reconnaissance Web 
analytics
Firewall 
ACL
Weaponization NIDS NIPS
Delivery Vigilant userProxy filter In-line AV Queuing
Exploitation HIDS Patch DEP
Installation HIDS “chroot” jail AV
C2 NIDS Firewall 
ACL NIPS Tarpit DNS 
redirect
Actions on 
Objectives Audit log Quality of 
Service Honeypot
Here, completeness equates to resiliency, which is the defender’s primary goal when faced with persistent
adversaries that continually adapt their operations over time. The most notable adaptations are exploits,
particularly previously undisclosed “zero-day” exploits. Security vendors call these “zero-day attacks,”
and tout “zero day protection”. This myopic focus fails to appreciate that the exploit is but one change
in a broader process. If intruders deploy a zero-day exploit but reuse observable tools or infrastructure
5
in other phases, that major improvement is fruitless if the defenders have mitigations for the repeated
indicators. This repetition demonstrates a defensive strategy of complete indicator utilization achieves
resiliency and forces the adversary to make more diﬃcult and comprehensive adjustments to achieve their
objectives. In this way, the defender increases the adversary’s cost of executing successful intrusions.
Defenders can generate metrics of this resiliency by measuring the performance and eﬀectiveness of
defensive actions against the intruders. Consider an example series of intrusion attempts from a single
APT campaign that occur over a seven month timeframe, shown in Figure 2. For each phase of the
kill chain, a white diamond indicates relevant, but passive, detections were in place at the time of that
month’s intrusion attempt, a black diamond indicates relevant mitigations were in place, and an empty
cell indicates no relevant capabilities were available. After each intrusion, analysts leverage newly revealed
indicators to update their defenses, as shown by the gray arrows.
 	 








 
 	
 			
 		

Figure 2: Illustration of the relative eﬀectiveness of defenses against subsequent intrusion attempts
The illustration shows, foremost, that at last one mitigation was in place for all three intrusion attempts,
thus mitigations were successful. However, it also clearly shows signiﬁcant diﬀerences in each month.
In December, defenders detect the weaponization and block the delivery but uncover a brand new,
unmitigated, zero-day exploit in the process. In March, the adversary re-uses the same exploit, but
evolves the weaponization technique and delivery infrastructure, circumventing detection and rendering
those defensive systems ineﬀective. By June, the defenders updated their capabilities suﬃciently to have
detections and mitigations layered from weaponization to C2. By framing metrics in the context of the
kill chain, defenders had the proper perspective of the relative eﬀect of their defenses against the intrusion
attempts and where there were gaps to prioritize remediation.
3.4 Intrusion Reconstruction
Kill chain analysis is a guide for analysts to understand what information is, and may be, available for
defensive courses of action. It is a model to analyze the intrusions in a new way. Most detected intrusions
will provide a limited set of attributes about a single phase of an intrusion. Analysts must still discover
many other attributes for each phase to enumerate the maximum set of options for courses of action.
Further, based on detection in a given phase, analysts can assume that prior phases of the intrusion have
already executed successfully. Only through complete analysis of prior phases, as shown in Figure 3, can
actions be taken at those phases to mitigate future intrusions. If one cannot reproduce the delivery phase
of an intrusion, one cannot hope to act on the delivery phase of subsequent intrusions from the same
adversary. The conventional incident response process initiates after our exploit phase, illustrating the
self-fulﬁlling prophecy that defenders are inherently disadvantaged and inevitably too late. The inability
to fully reconstruct all intrusion phases prioritizes tools, technologies, and processes to ﬁll this gap.
Defenders must be able to move their detection and analysis up the kill chain and more importantly to
implement courses of actions across the kill chain. In order for an intrusion to be economical, adversaries
must re-use tools and infrastructure. By completely understanding an intrusion, and leveraging intelligence
6
Reconnaissance
 Weaponization
 Delivery
 Exploitation
 Installation
 C2
 Actions
Analysis Detection
Figure 3: Late phase detection
on these tools and infrastructure, defenders force an adversary to change every phase of their intrusion in
order to successfully achieve their goals in subsequent intrusions. In this way, network defenders use the
persistence of adversaries’ intrusions against them to achieve a level of resilience.
Equally as important as thorough analysis of successful compromises is synthesis of unsuccessful intrusions.
As defenders collect data on adversaries, they will push detection from the latter phases of the kill chain into
earlier ones. Detection and prevention at pre-compromise phases also necessitates a response. Defenders
must collect as much information on the mitigated intrusion as possible, so that they may synthesize what
might have happened should future intrusions circumvent the currently eﬀective protections and detections
(see Figure 4). For example, if a targeted malicious email is blocked due to re-use of a known indicator,
synthesis of the remaining kill chain might reveal a new exploit or backdoor contained therein. Without
this knowledge, future intrusions, delivered by diﬀerent means, may go undetected. If defenders implement
countermeasures faster than their known adversaries evolve, they maintain a tactical advantage.
Reconnaissance
 Weaponization
 Delivery
 Exploitation
 Installation
 C2
 Actions
Analysis Detection Synthesis
Figure 4: Earlier phase detection
3.5 Campaign Analysis
At a strategic level, analyzing multiple intrusion kill chains over time will identify commonalities and
overlapping indicators. Figure 5 illustrates how highly-dimensional correlation between two intrusions
through multiple kill chain phases can be identiﬁed. Through this process, defenders will recognize
and deﬁne intrusion campaigns, linking together perhaps years of activity from a particular persistent
threat. The most consistent indicators, the campaigns key indicators, provide centers of gravity for
defenders to prioritize development and use of courses of action. Figure 6 shows how intrusions may have
varying degrees of correlation, but the inﬂection points where indicators most frequently align identify
these key indicators. These less volatile indicators can be expected to remain consistent, predicting the
characteristics of future intrusions with greater conﬁdence the more frequently they are observed. In
this way, an adversary’s persistence becomes a liability which the defender can leverage to strengthen its
posture.
The principle goal of campaign analysis is to determine the patterns and behaviors of the intruders,
their tactics, techniques, and procedures (TTP), to detect “how” they operate rather than speciﬁcally
“what” they do. The defender’s objective is less to positively attribute the identity of the intruders than
to evaluate their capabilities, doctrine, objectives and limitations; intruder attribution, however, may
well be a side product of this level of analysis. As defenders study new intrusion activity, they will
either link it to existing campaigns or perhaps identify a brand new set of behaviors of a theretofore
unknown threat and track it as a new campaign. Defenders can assess their relative defensive posture on
a campaign-by-campaign basis, and based on the assessed risk of each, develop strategic courses of action
to cover any gaps.
Another core objective of campaign analysis is to understand the intruders’ intent. To the extent
that defenders can determine technologies or individuals of interest, they can begin to understand the
adversarys mission objectives. This necessitates trending intrusions over time to evaluate targeting
patterns and closely examining any data exﬁltrated by the intruders. Once again this analysis results
7
Figure 5: Common indicators between intru-
sions
 Figure 6: Campaign key indicators
8
in a roadmap to prioritize highly focused security measures to defend these individuals, networks or
technologies.
4 Case Study
To illustrate the beneﬁt of these techniques, a case study observed by the Lockheed Martin Computer
Incident Response Team (LM-CIRT) in March 2009 of three intrusion attempts by an adversary is
considered. Through analysis of the intrusion kill chains and robust indicator maturity, network defenders
successfully detected and mitigated an intrusion leveraging a “zero-day” vulnerability. All three intrusions
leveraged a common APT tactic: targeted malicious email (TME) delivered to a limited set of individuals,
containing a weaponized attachment that installs a backdoor which initiates outbound communications
to a C2 server.
4.1 Intrusion Attempt 1
On March 3, 2009, LM-CIRT detected a suspicious attachment within an email discussing an upcoming
American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics (AIAA) conference. The email claimed to be from
an individual who legitimately worked for AIAA, and was directed to only 5 users, each of whom had
received similar TME in the past. Analysts determined the malicious attachment, tcnom.pdf, would
exploit a known, but unpatched, vulnerability in Adobe Acrobat Portable Document Format (PDF):
CVE-2009-0658, documented by Adobe on February 19, 2009 (Adobe, 2009) but not patched until March
10, 2009. A copy of the email headers and body follow.
Received: (qmail 71864 invoked by uid 60001); Tue, 03 Mar 2009 15:01:19 +0000
Received: from [60.abc.xyz.215] by web53402.mail.re2.yahoo.com via HTTP; Tue,
03 Mar 2009 07:01:18 -0800 (PST)
Date: Tue, 03 Mar 2009 07:01:18 -0800 (PST)
From: Anne E... <dn...etto@yahoo.com>
Subject: AIAA Technical Committees
To: [REDACTED]
Reply-to: dn...etto@yahoo.com
Message-id: <107017.64068.qm@web53402.mail.re2.yahoo.com>
MIME-version: 1.0
X-Mailer: YahooMailWebService/0.7.289.1
Content-type: multipart/mixed; boundary="Boundary_(ID_Hq9CkDZSoSvBMukCRm7rsg)"
X-YMail-OSG:
Please submit one copy (photocopies are acceptable) of this form, and one
copy of nominee’s resume to: AIAA Technical Committee Nominations,
1801 Alexander Bell Drive, Reston, VA 20191. Fax number is 703/264-
7551. Form can also be submitted via our web site at www.aiaa.org, Inside
AIAA, Technical Committees
Within the weaponized PDF were two other ﬁles, a benign PDF and a Portable Executable (PE) backdoor
installation ﬁle. These ﬁles, in the process of weaponization, were encrypted using a trivial algorithm with
an 8-bit key stored in the exploit shellcode. Upon opening the PDF, shellcode exploiting CVE-2009-0658
would decrypt the installation binary, place it on disk as C:\Documents and Settings\[username]
\Local Settings\fssm32.exe , and invoke it. The shellcode would also extract the benign PDF and
display it to the user. Analysts discovered that the benign PDF was an identical copy of one published on
the AIAA website at http://www.aiaa.org/pdf/inside/tcnom.pdf, revealing adversary reconnaissance
actions.
The installer fssm32.exe would extract the backdoor components embedded within itself, saving EXE
and HLP ﬁles as C:\Program Files\Internet Explorer\IEUpd.exe and IEXPLORE.hlp. Once active,
the backdoor would send heartbeat data to the C2 server 202.abc.xyz.7 via valid HTTP requests. Table
2 articulates the identiﬁed, relevant indicators per phase. Due to successful mitigations, the adversary
never took actions on objectives, therefore that phase is marked ”N/A.”
9
Table 2: Intrusion Attempt 1 Indicators
Phase Indicators
Reconnaissance [Recipient List]
Benign File: tcnom.pdf
Weaponization Trivial encryption algorithm: Key 1
Delivery
dn...etto@yahoo.com
Downstream IP: 60.abc.xyz.215
Subject: AIAA Technical Committees
[Email body]
Exploitation CVE-2009-0658
[shellcode]
Installation
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C2 202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
Actions on Objectives N/A
4.2 Intrusion Attempt 2
One day later, another TME intrusion attempt was executed. Analysts would identify substantially
similar characteristics and link this and the previous day’s attempt to a common campaign, but analysts
also noted a number of diﬀerences. The repeated characteristics enabled defenders to block this activity,
while the new characteristics provided analysts additional intelligence to build resiliency with further
detection and mitigation courses of action.
Received: (qmail 97721 invoked by uid 60001); 4 Mar 2009 14:35:22 -0000
Message-ID: <552620.97248.qm@web53411.mail.re2.yahoo.com>
Received: from [216.abc.xyz.76] by web53411.mail.re2.yahoo.com via HTTP; Wed,
04 Mar 2009 06:35:20 PST
X-Mailer: YahooMailWebService/0.7.289.1
Date: Wed, 4 Mar 2009 06:35:20 -0800 (PST)
From: Anne E... <dn...etto@yahoo.com>
Reply-To: dn...etto@yahoo.com
Subject: 7th Annual U.S. Missile Defense Conference
To: [REDACTED]
MIME-Version: 1.0
Content-Type: multipart/mixed; boundary="0-760892832-1236177320=:97248"
Welcome to the 7th Annual U.S. Missile Defense Conference
The sending email address was common to both the March 3 and March 4 activity, but the subject matter,
recipient list, attachment name, and most importantly, the downstream IP address (216.abc.xyz.76) dif-
fered. Analysis of the attached PDF, MDA_Prelim_2.pdf, revealed an identical weaponization encryption
algorithm and key, as well as identical shellcode to exploit the same vulnerability. The PE installer in the
PDF was identical to that used the previous day, and the benign PDF was once again an identical copy of
a ﬁle on AIAA’s website ( http://www.aiaa.org/events/missiledefense/MDA_Prelim_09.pdf). The
adversary never took actions towards its objectives, therefore that phase is again marked ”N/A.” A
summary of indicators from the ﬁrst two intrusion attempts is provided in Table 3.
10
Table 3: Intrusion Attempts 1 and 2 Indicators
Phase Intrusion 1 Intrusion 2
Reconnaissance [Recipient List]
Benign File: tcnom.pdf
[Recipient List]
Benign File: MDA_Prelim_09.pdf
Weaponization Trivial encryption algorithm: Key 1Trivial encryption algorithm: Key 1
Delivery
Downstream IP: 60.abc.xyz.215
Subject: AIAA Technical Committees
[Email body]
Downstream IP: 216.abc.xyz.76
Subject: 7th Annual U.S. Missile Defense 
Conference
[Email body]Delivery
dn...etto@yahoo.comdn...etto@yahoo.com
Exploitation CVE-2009-0658
[shellcode]
CVE-2009-0658
[shellcode]
Installation
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C2 202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
Actions on 
Objectives N/A N/A
4.3 Intrusion Attempt 3
Over two weeks later, on March 23, 2009, a signiﬁcantly diﬀerent intrusion was identiﬁed due to indicator
overlap, though minimal, with Intrusions 1 and 2. This email contained a PowerPoint ﬁle which exploited
a vulnerability that was not, until that moment, known to the vendor or network defenders. The
vulnerability was publicly acknowledged 10 days later by Microsoft as security advisory 969136 and
identiﬁed as CVE-2009-0556 (Microsoft, 2009b). Microsoft issued a patch on May 12, 2009 (Microsoft,
2009a). In this campaign, the adversary made a signiﬁcant shift in using a brand new, “zero-day” exploit.
Details of the email follow.
Received: (qmail 62698 invoked by uid 1000); Mon, 23 Mar 2009 17:14:22 +0000
Received: (qmail 82085 invoked by uid 60001); Mon, 23 Mar 2009 17:14:21 +0000
Received: from [216.abc.xyz.76] by web43406.mail.sp1.yahoo.com via HTTP; Mon,
23 Mar 2009 10:14:21 -0700 (PDT)
Date: Mon, 23 Mar 2009 10:14:21 -0700 (PDT)
From: Ginette C... <ginette.c...@yahoo.com>
Subject: Celebrities Without Makeup
To: [REDACTED]
Message-id: <297350.78665.qm@web43406.mail.sp1.yahoo.com>
MIME-version: 1.0
X-Mailer: YahooMailClassic/5.1.20 YahooMailWebService/0.7.289.1
Content-type: multipart/mixed; boundary="Boundary_(ID_DpBDtBoPTQ1DnYXw29L2Ng)"
<email body blank>
This email contained a new sending address, new recipient list, markedly diﬀerent benign content displayed
to the user (from “missile defense” to “celebrity makeup”), and the malicious PowerPoint attachment
contained a completely new exploit. However, the adversaries used the same downstream IP address,
216.abc.xyz.76, to connect to the webmail service as they used in Intrusion 2. The PowerPoint ﬁle was
weaponized using the same algorithm as the previous two intrusions, but with a diﬀerent 8-bit key. The
PE installer and backdoor were found to be identical to the previous two intrusions. A summary of
indicators from all three intrusions is provided in Table 4.
Leveraging intelligence on adversaries at the ﬁrst intrusion attempt enabled network defenders to prevent
a known zero-day exploit. With each consecutive intrusion attempt, through complete analysis, more
indicators were discovered. A robust set of courses of action enabled defenders to mitigate subsequent
11
Table 4: Intrusion Attempts 1, 2, and 3 Indicators
Phase Intrusion 1 Intrusion 2 Intrusion 3
Reconnaissance [Recipient List]
Benign PDF
[Recipient List]
Benign PDF
[Recipient List]
Benign PPT
Weaponization
Trivial encryption algorithmTrivial encryption algorithmTrivial encryption algorithm
Weaponization
Key 1Key 1 Key 2
Delivery
[Email subject]
[Email body]
[Email subject]
[Email body]
[Email subject]
[Email body]
Delivery dn...etto@yahoo.comdn...etto@yahoo.com ginette.c...@yahoo.comDelivery
60.abc.xyz.215 216.abc.xyz.76216.abc.xyz.76
Exploitation CVE-2009-0658
[shellcode]
CVE-2009-0658
[shellcode]
[PPT 0-day]
[shellcode]
Installation
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C:\...\fssm32.exe
C:\...\IEUpd.exe
C:\...\IEXPLORE.hlp
C2 202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
202.abc.xyz.7
[HTTP request]
Actions on 
Objectives N/A N/A N/A
intrusions upon delivery, even when adversaries deployed a previously-unseen exploit. Further, through
this diligent approach, defenders forced the adversary to avoid all mature indicators to successfully launch
an intrusion from that point forward.
Following conventional incident response methodology may have been eﬀective in managing systems
compromised by these intrusions in environments completely under the control of network defenders.
However, this would not have mitigated the damage done by a compromised mobile asset that moved
out of the protected environment. Additionally, by only focusing on post-compromise eﬀects (those after
the Exploit phase), fewer indicators are available. Simply using a diﬀerent backdoor and installer would
circumvent available detections and mitigations, enabling adversary success. By preventing compromise
in the ﬁrst place, the resultant risk is reduced in a way unachievable through the conventional incident
response process.
5 Summary
Intelligence-driven computer network defense is a necessity in light of advanced persistent threats. As
conventional, vulnerability-focused processes are insuﬃcient, understanding the threat itself, its intent,
capability, doctrine, and patterns of operation is required to establish resilience. The intrusion kill
chain provides a structure to analyze intrusions, extract indicators and drive defensive courses of actions.
Furthermore, this model prioritizes investment for capability gaps, and serves as a framework to measure
the eﬀectiveness of the defenders’ actions. When defenders consider the threat component of risk to
build resilience against APTs, they can turn the persistence of these actors into a liability, decreasing the
adversary’s likelihood of success with each intrusion attempt.
The kill chain shows an asymmetry between aggressor and defender, any one repeated component by
the aggressor is a liability. Understanding the nature of repetition for given adversaries, be it out of
convenience, personal preference, or ignorance, is an analysis of cost. Modeling the cost-beneﬁt ratio
to intruders is an area for additional research. When that cost-beneﬁt is decidedly imbalanced, it is
perhaps an indicator of information superiority of one group over the other. Models of information
superiority may be valuable for computer network attack and exploitation doctrine development. Finally,
this paper presents an intrusions kill chain model in the context of computer espionage. Intrusions may
represent a broader problem class. This research may strongly overlap with other disciplines, such as IED
countermeasures.
12
References
Adobe. APSA09-01: Security Updates available for Adobe Reader and Acrobat versions 9 and earlier,
February 2009. URL http://www.adobe.com/support/security/advisories/apsa09-01.html.
F. Duran, S. H. Conrad, G. N. Conrad, D. P. Duggan, and E. B. Held. Building A System For Insider
Security. IEEE Security & Privacy , 7(6):30–38, 2009. doi: 10.1109/MSP.2009.111.
Keith Epstein and Ben Elgin. Network Security Breaches Plague NASA, November 2008. URL http:
//www.businessweek.com/print/magazine/content/08_48/b4110072404167.htm.
LTC Ashton Hayes. Defending Against the Unknown: Antiterrorism and the Terrorist Planning Cycle.The
Guardian, 10(1):32–36, 2008. URL http://www.jcs.mil/content/files/2009-04/041309155243_
spring2008.pdf.
Bryan Krekel. Capability of the People’s Republic of China to Conduct Cyber Warfare and Com-
puter Network Exploitation, October 2009. URL http://www.uscc.gov/researchpapers/2009/
NorthropGrumman_PRC_Cyber_Paper_FINAL_Approved%20Report_16Oct2009.pdf.
James Andrew Lewis. Holistic Approaches to Cybersecurity to Enable Network Centric Operations, April
2008. URL http://armedservices.house.gov/pdfs/TUTC040108/Lewis_Testimony040108.pdf.
Mandiant. M-Trends: The Advanced Persistent Threat, January 2010. URL http://www.mandiant.
com/products/services/m-trends.
Microsoft. Microsoft Security Bulletin MS09-017: Vulnerabilities in Microsoft Oﬃce PowerPoint Could
Allow Remote Code Execution (967340), May 2009a. URL http://www.microsoft.com/technet/
security/bulletin/ms09-017.mspx.
Microsoft. Microsoft Security Advisory (969136): Vulnerability in Microsoft Oﬃce PowerPoint Could
Allow Remote Code Execution, April 2009b. URL http://www.microsoft.com/technet/security/
advisory/969136.mspx.
Sarandis Mitropoulos, Dimitrios Patsosa, and Christos Douligeris. On Incident Handling and Response:
A state-of-the-art approach. Computers & Security , 5:351–370, July 2006. URL http://dx.doi.org/
10.1016/j.cose.2005.09.006.
National Institute of Standards and Technology. Special Publication 800-61: Computer Security Incident
Handling Guide, March 2008. URL http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html.
National Research Council. Countering the Threat of Improvised Explosive Devices: Basic Research
Opportunities (Abbreviated Version), 2007. URL http://books.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=
11953.
T. Sakuraba, S. Domyo, Bin-Hui Chou, and K. Sakurai. Exploring Security Countermeasures along the
Attack Sequence. In Proc. Int. Conf. Information Security and Assurance ISA 2008 , pages 427–432,
2008. doi: 10.1109/ISA.2008.112.
Alex Stamos. “Aurora” Response Recommendations, February 2010. URL https://www.isecpartners.
com/files/iSEC_Aurora_Response_Recommendations.pdf.
John A. Tirpak. Find, Fix, Track, Target, Engage, Assess. Air Force Magazine, 83:24–29, 2000. URL http:
//www.airforce-magazine.com/MagazineArchive/Pages/2000/July%202000/0700find.aspx.
UK-NISCC. National Infrastructure Security Co-ordination Centre: Targeted Trojan Email Attacks,
June 2005. URL https://www.cpni.gov.uk/docs/ttea.pdf.
United States Army Training and Doctrine Command. A Military Guide to Terrorism in the Twenty-First
Century, August 2007. URL http://www.dtic.mil/srch/doc?collection=t3&id=ADA472623.
US-CERT. Technical Cyber Security Alert TA05-189A: Targeted Trojan Email Attacks, July 2005. URL
http://www.us-cert.gov/cas/techalerts/TA05-189A.html.
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. 2008 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, November 2008. URL http://www.uscc.gov/annual_
report/2008/annual_report_full_08.pdf.
13
U.S.-China Economic and Security Review Commission. 2009 Report to Congress of the U.S.-China
Economic and Security Review Commission, November 2009. URL http://www.uscc.gov/annual_
report/2009/annual_report_full_09.pdf.
U.S. Department of Defense. Joint Publication 3-13 Information Operations, February 2006. URL
http://www.dtic.mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp3_13.pdf.
U.S. Department of Defense. Joint Publication 3-60 Joint Targeting, April 2007. URL http://www.dtic.
mil/doctrine/new_pubs/jp3_60.pdf.
Robert Willison and Mikko Siponen. Overcoming the insider: reducing employee computer crime
through Situational Crime Prevention. Communications of the ACM , 52(9):133–137, 2009. doi:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1562164.1562198.
14